The paper titled "Neuronal Correlates of Fidgeting in the Visual Cortex of Transgenic Mice" discusses a study that aimed to investigate the neuronal correlates of fidgeting in mice using genetically encoded calcium sensors and two-photon calcium imaging. The authors leveraged a standardized and spontaneous behavioral fidget event in passively viewing mice to dissect how these behavior signals are broadcasted to different layers and areas of the visual cortex. They found that a standardized non-visual behavioral event, such as a fidget, can impact the activity of primary sensory areas like V1 without modulating visual responses. 

The study involved recording neuronal activity in vivo using two-photon imaging while mice were free to run on a rotating disc while a camera captured mouse body posture. The authors observed a variety of behaviors such as whisking, grooming, mastication, flailing, walking, running, and a startle behavior denoted as a "fidget." Fidgets manifested as a combination of abdominal flexion and an upward force generated from the lower limbs causing lower trunk curvature and contraction. Fidgets were qualitatively stereotyped across mice in their duration, pattern of movement, and motor response magnitude. 

The authors developed a computer vision model to automatically identify fidget events from hours of mice behavioral videos using Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOGs), which are transformation invariant visual features extracted using edge-detection-like computation. The authors trained a Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier in a supervised manner using the human-annotated labels. The final trained model had a recall performance of 74%+/-4.2(mean+/-std,n=7) and a precision performance of 78%+/-5.3(mean+/-std,n=7) for the seven one-hour long experiments held out as a validation test-set. 

The authors found that fidget rate was highly variable across mice, raising the possibility that various mouse Cre-lines have different stress sensitivities, thus accounting for the fidget rate variance. The study confirmed the importance of taking into account motor activity when analyzing neuronal data. The authors propose a complementary approach to uncovering the role of motor signals in primary sensory areas by focusing their analysis on a single standardized behavior event, akin to visually-evoked stimulus trials. 

The authors found that excitatory neurons were responding with three distinct temporal profiles to fidgets. Remarkably, the proportion and responses of neurons in each class were maintained in all layers and brain areas looked at, and consequently, the authors could not predict the location of their recording using the response of fidget despite a large database to train their decoder on. This result suggests that behavioral information is not only broadcasted broadly but also homogeneously throughout the cortical mantle. 

The broad availability of standardized behavior signals could be a key component in how the cortex selects, learns, and binds local sensory information with relevant motor outputs. The paper also discusses the surgical protocols used for the two-photon datasets and the retinotopic mapping used to delineate functionally defined visual area boundaries and enable targeting of in vivo two-photon calcium imaging to retinotopically defined locations in primary and secondary visual areas. Calcium imaging was performed using a two-photon imaging instrument, Nikon A1RMP+. The paper also describes the image processing pipeline used for motion correction, segmentation of connected shapes, and classification of soma-like shapes from remaining clutter. 

In conclusion, the publication describes a study that investigates the effects of fidgeting on neural responses in the visual cortex of mice. The study uses side-view full-body cameras to capture videos of mice engaged in fidgeting behavior, which are then processed using computer vision techniques. The authors found that fidgeting can impact the activity of primary sensory areas without modulating visual responses and that behavioral information is broadcasted broadly and homogeneously throughout the cortical mantle. The study highlights the importance of taking into account motor activity when analyzing neuronal data and proposes a complementary approach to uncovering the role of motor signals in primary sensory areas.