The paragraph describes a study that aimed to investigate the three observable signatures of hierarchical predictive learning in cortical pyramidal neurons in the primary visual cortex of awake, behaving mice. The study used chronic two-photon calcium imaging of layer 2/3 and layer 5 pyramidal neurons at both the cell bodies and the distal apical dendrites over multiple days, during which the animals were exposed to randomly oriented visual stimuli with both expected and unexpected statistical properties. The results showed evidence corroborating all three signatures of hierarchical predictive learning, supporting the hypothesis that the visual cortex learns from unexpected events using a hierarchical model. The study also observed interesting differences between the distal apical dendrites and somata, suggesting that there may be important differences in the functional roles of these compartments in hierarchical predictive learning in the neocortex. The study proposes a broad conceptual model of learning in the brain, where the brain learns an internal representation of the world in associative regions, based on which top-down predictions are provided via the distal apical dendrites to pyramidal neurons in areas like VisP. If incoming stimuli contain unexpected features, i.e., features not predicted at the distal apical dendrites, pyramidal cell somatic and distal apical dendritic activity will reflect the unexpected feature or event. However, with experience, this activity triggers changes to the internal model of the world, such that it better captures the new information provided by the unexpected stimuli. As a result, the distal apical dendritic activity becomes more attuned to these novel forms of stimuli. The study also found that the unexpected event responses in the soma decreased over time, in line with encoding of errors, whereas the responses in the dendrites increased, suggesting that different computations were reflected in the different compartments of the neurons. However, there are limitations to this work, including the fact that somata and distal apical dendrites were not recorded in the same neurons and that the study did not record simultaneously from other higher-order brain regions and their projections into visual cortex. The paper discusses the methods used in the study to analyze the responses of neurons in the visual cortex of mice to different visual stimuli, including Gabor patches and visual flow. The study used various statistical methods to assess the significance of the results obtained. The authors note that their experiments did not incorporate any behavioral training or rewards, and that different sensory stimuli and recordings in different brain regions may produce different results. They suggest that future work should thoroughly explore the space of possible expected and unexpected sensory stimuli and other regions of the neocortex to more fully assess the hierarchical predictive learning hypothesis.